Alpha-beta is a pruning technique that
allows us to ignore whole sections of
the game tree, but still get
the same answer as with minimax.
>> So you're saying that alpha-beta
never changes the answer, but
is more efficient than minimax?
>> Precisely,
often it is much more efficient.
Let's take another look
at the minimax tree for
level three of the five
move Isolation board.
We'll assume that our computer player
is evaluating the game tree from
left to right.
We have five subtrees
that we'll consider.
Looking at the most left one,
the first branch has only two nodes
with values of 1 and 2 respectively.
It is the max level, so
we choose the two and
propagate it up to the mean level.
>> Since the opponent x will choose
a branch that minimizes the value,
we know this sub tree will
have a value of 2 or less.
So that means for any of the remaining
branches, as soon as we see a 2 or more,
we could ignore the rest of the nodes
because they will never be selected.
>> Precisely.
>> And we have 2s in the leftmost
node of these three branches.
>> Yep.
>> Which means we can
ignore 6 of these 11 nodes.
Wow, that's going to save some time.
>> It gets even better.
Let's look at the next subtree over.
As soon as we get to this
two on the left hand branch,
we know that this whole subtree
is going to return a 2 or less.
But we already know that we have
a 2 from the first subtree.
So at the highest node, we already
know that we will get a 2 or more.
That means we can ignore all
the remaining branches of the second
subtree.
Going on to the middle subtree,
we again get a 2 in the left most node.
We don't have any constraints
on the node above yet.
So we keep exploring and get another 2.
No other valid move is possible,
so this max node returns a 2.
Now, the node above is a minimizing
node, so it must return a 2 or less.
Thus, because we know that the top most
level already has a branch with a 2
value, we can ignore all the rest
of the nodes in the subtree.
>> I see a pattern here.
With the fourth subtree,
we also get a 2 early on,
which means we can ignore most of
the nodes in this subtree as well.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
>> And the same thing
happens in this last subtree.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
>> Hold it,
this sub-tree is one of the bad moves.
Its value is actually 1.
Don't we want our computer
player to know that?
>> Why?
As long as we only care about our
computer player selecting the same good
move as it would with the minimax
app rhythm, we are okay.
Here our computer selects
the left most branch,
which is the same as our minimax arrow.
>> You're assuming that minimax
is valuing left to right and
takes the left most
branch in case of a tie.
>> Yep, we're assuming that
our goal was to play the game,
not keep a list of all the equally
good moves on a given level.
>> That's exciting.
Looking at the entire tree, it seems we
don't need to look at most of the nodes.
We only need to look at 29 of
the 78 nodes on the entire tree.
That will save a lot of time.
>> In fact, while our minimax
algorithm runs in b to the d time,
minimax with alpha-beta pruning can run
b to the d over 2 time if the nodes
are ordered optimally with
the best moves being first.
Even with random move ordering,
alpha-beta pruning reduces the expected
run time which is b to
the three-quarters d.